All righty, let's see here. Jackie, who's done that heater down? I can't hear
this one. Because they're not that loud.
You say it hasn't been too cold out there? Excuse me? You say it hasn't been
very cold out there? No, not really. We had one slight fall of snow...
...about a week or more ago, and that was it. It's kind of a handy place to be.
We're up at about 1,800 feet, which is... ...just below the snow line. The snow
line, we're in the foothills of Sierra Nevada, so we'd get pretty high. But the
snow line is something like, oh, 10 miles away. Okay. So you can go off in the
snow if you want, but you don't have it on top of you. where we're in the other
direction if we're not that far from San Francisco. All righty, I've got a
technical problem on this end. All right, let's see if that cured it up. What's
that? Uh, the loop. Did we have a loop? I don't detect one now. Oh, yeah, I
still got one here. Let's see if that got rid of it. Is that better? Uh, nope.
All right, now let's see if it's gone. It's gone? Yeah, it's gone. Count to 5
for me, please. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Looks good. All righty. Did I get it right? Yeah,
we got it. We got it. We got it. Test, test, test, test. Test, test, test, test.
All right.
All righty. You said it had been too cold out there, didn't you? What, here?
Yeah. No, it's been very mild here. Okay.
When we first arrived, we thought it was a little chilly,
until we heard that Orlando had minus 29 the previous night, and then we didn't
think it was the chilly.
Okay, we've got the tape recorder rolling. Just one more time, if you'd count to
three for me, please. or how about one two three one two three looks good
that's that's what it's supposed to be louder if this is fine now that's that's
pretty good now we're uh far and beyond where we were as far as audio recording
goes now we do all sorts of mixing and jump with this in the studio after we get
through recording it? I have every confidence in American know-how. Good.
All right we're gonna go ahead and get started. Okay.
Okay. Okay. All right. How did you get interested in writing? It was too long
ago to remember. When I left school at... When I was 16 and wanted to be a
writer then, I guess it was something that I always enjoyed doing as a kid at
school. You know, the essays and the story writing exercises you get. And when I
left school, I told the world I was going to be a writer. And it seemed a good
idea until somebody said, well, with all the accumulated wisdom and experience
of 16 years, what are you going to write about that the world is breathlessly
waiting to hear? And I hadn't thought about that. The answer was not a lot. So I
went away into engineering and electronics and computers and things like that
for something like 20 years. And I suppose the interest in writing probably
never went away. And 20-odd years later, that situation had changed a lot. I'd
spent a lot of that time. I started off as an electronics engineer and then a
computer designer and then went into selling computer systems. And not the blue
boxes you see at work that print out payrolls and things. I'm not talking about
business computers, but the real-time scientific systems that might go into
scientific research laboratories connected up to instruments to collect all the
data and turn them into pictures on screens and the sort of computers you'd find
in particle accelerator installations or observatories. In other words, all my
customers were scientists, physicists, biologists, chemists, and so forth. And
the kinds of systems we're talking about ranged up to several million dollars.
And when somebody's buying a system of that size, it's not the kind of thing
that you sell in a one-half-hour sales call and, say, sign the paper. you're
frequently working with them for 12, maybe 18 months before a contract is
finalized. During that time, you have to try and understand a lot of what
they're doing in terms of being able to put together and recommend the right
sort of system for their needs. In other words, you get to know a little bit of
what they're all doing. I found it fascinating, a fascinating world that they
lived in. the you also get to know them socially how they think how they tick
what makes them laugh very interesting as people and I found 20 years later that
there were a lot of interesting things to put here to write about and form the
basis of stories so I didn't particularly set out to be a science fiction writer
I suppose I became one by accident I just always wanted to write and started
writing stories about the little bit of life that I'd had some personal
experience of and was told I was a science fiction writer, and I said, how's
that? They said, well, the publisher is publishing it under their science
fiction influence, so we guess you have to be, so I said okay. And it kind of
started out like that. Oh, okay. Could you hold for just a second here? I've got
to take care of a slight flutter in one of my machines. Okay, hang on, I'll be
right back with you. Okay.
Still here. Oh, okay. you've covered a lot of the background already so is there
a problem? I'm just getting a funny scraping noise off a reel of tape so it's
not going to be really picking up anyway so we'll just leave it has it gone
away? no it's sitting there just scraping away but to heck with it you've
covered a lot of the background stuff like I said so I think I will go right
into some other stuff
associating with the scientist as you were I guess that gave you a lot of the
background material that you use in your stories. Yeah. Well, that provided more
the trigger.
The stimulation to take an interest in that kind of work, I guess reading
provided a lot of it. But that kind of material is easy to read when you have a
vested interest in understanding it because you have business relationships that
will profit from that understanding In other words, it's reading with a purpose,
a clear-cut purpose rather than just out of curiosity or a way of killing time.
But luckily, it became a little more than that. Do you usually do a lot of—back
up here. Most of your stories, I guess, would be called hard science fiction.
Yeah. Do you do a lot of research whenever you do write a story? Yeah, I do.
I read quite a lot, and I suppose the bulk of my reading is non-fiction, so even
casual reading in a way becomes what might be termed non-specific research. In
other words, information that just gets stored away and comes out later,
although I didn't study it for any particular reason at the time. But before I
became a full-time writer, I was still working in the computer business, I made
use of my customers pretty freely as consultants, which was kind of handy. I
found that I had customers who were brain surgeons and other customers who
studied pieces of rock brought back from the Apollo missions and other guys who
were building or investigating machine intelligence. And just about any of the
topics, or the favorite themes of science fiction that you could tick out of a
hat, the chances were sort of not ten to one. I had a customer specializing in
that field, and I just had to... If I needed some background information on a
particular topic, I could almost guarantee I had a phone number in my diary of
the guy who could talk all day about it. And they loved doing it, as well. I
used to call them, and if they'd like to come and talk to you tomorrow, Well
we're a little busy but what's it about? Oh I need some help with the book I'm
working on. Well why didn't you say so? What time do you want to show up? And
they talk all day. And I think this is one of the interesting
sides of selling computers into this kind of area. You can imagine some of these
specialists they talk to bacteria all day long or whatever and they end up shut
in the back rooms of universities. And maybe there are four people on the planet
they can talk to who understand their language. And sometimes they find it hard
to believe that somebody from the world outside that has walked in off the
street is sincerely interested to sit down and talk to them and is curious, and
he wants to know what they're doing, wants to have it explained. And it was a
very pleasant way to worth living, you not only, you
know, gain customers in many instances, I found you gain friends as well. It was
a very pleasant combination to build a life around with, the things you like
doing,
the kind of work that you like to the kind of activity that you like to do is
also part of a process of making friends and not only that somebody's prepared
to pay you to do it I found that a very pleasant situation Your first novel, in
fact I believe it was the first thing that you wrote was in A Hair of the Stars
it's a science fiction detective story Yes. How did you come to write that book?
Well, I think that sums it up pretty well. It reflects, I think, the way I see
science, which is indeed as a wonderful, ongoing, never-ending detective story.
and I suppose I got a little bit dissatisfied with some of the depictions of
science and scientists that I'd seen in fiction. I formed the impression or the
suspicion in some cases that perhaps the people who had written some of the
fiction certainly would have perhaps not worked in a scientific field or spoken
to a scientist for a long, long time and maybe generations of people had
reinforced each other's clichés. Scientists were always eccentric and they wore
odd-coloured shoes and they drew cabbages that ate people and they wanted to
conquer the world or something. There were these cute public impressions of
scientists just as people who run down the street with no clothes off, shouting
Eureka, or,
you read phrases like, it came to him in a flash, and you read on, and what came
to him in a flash would have been enough to keep Einstein busy for the next 20
years, and real science, yeah, there are insights, There are strokes of genius,
but the overwhelming bulk of the work is done by a lot of unsung heroes, a lot
of people doing nothing really dramatic or exciting, but just meticulously
sifting through details and collecting information for generations and for
centuries or different parts of the world. And it's really like putting together
a huge jigsaw puzzle, Lots of people cutting out pieces and twisting them
around. Every now and again somebody will take a huge chunk in this corner and
see that it fits with a huge chunk down there. And that's a breakthrough. And so
it goes on. And it really is a detective story. I think it's a far more exciting
one than most detective fiction. And I wanted to write a story that attempted to
depict it in this kind of way and hopefully would convey some of the excitement
that personally I feel when I look at this whole scene. Yeah, I believe... I
think that... I thought that, yeah, let's make it a detective story, but if
we...
If we want a detective mystery that is going to be sufficiently intriguing to
motivate a large proportion of the scientific community as happened in Inherit
the Stars, we want something a little more original and exciting than bodies in
the library or footprints in the flower bed. So we invented Charlie and the
aliens, and the rest I suppose you know. Basically it was an attempt to depict
science as it is, or at least as I perceive it. And at the same time weave that
into a story that people who were non-scientists, non-specialists, would find
stimulating and arousing for the curiosity even if, you know, without trying to
turn it into a 250-page lab report or something like that. Yeah, I believe, I
don't know if I'm reading this into your work or not, but some of what I'm
feeling is that your writing is sort of almost a celebration of learning, you
know, the learning process. Yes. I think it's one of the most exciting processes
anybody can experience. I think it's very sad that in large sections of our
culture we should have evolved the attitude that learning is something you
endure until you leave school, and then it ceases without output. I think
education and living are just different aspects of the same process that never
ends in
the minds of a lot of people the two things seem to have separated out and for
some reason learning is looked upon as hard work and something that you you
steer clear of unless you can't avoid it I think that's very very sad no reason
why it should be so it's just a consequence of cultural expectations a lot of
people expect it to be hard work and tedious and sure enough it is. In your
stories, I've noticed that you really flesh out the futures that you create with
a lot of detail. Uh-huh.
I lost my question. You were saying about the future of detail. Yeah, let me
just rephrase it here. I notice in your stories that you really fleshed them out
with a lot of detail. That's simply to just make the story more realistic.
I don't know that there's any particular purpose in doing that. I try and use as
much detail as I feel is needed to convey whatever meaning I'm trying to convey
at that particular part of the book.
some in fact some parts I got over very quickly because there's really not a lot
to say if
I don't know if you have any specific examples in mind that we could talk about
more particularly but I remember and one I think the short answer is I simply
make descriptions etc as detailed as I feel they need to be to say what I want
to say Yeah, I was remembering one particular instance when a hunt is traveling
from England to the United States. And he opens up his briefcase and plugs in
his video phone to the plane and makes this long-distance call right there. It
seems so natural that it
just creates a very realistic atmosphere for your story. Yeah, I like to do
things like that. I see what you mean by detail now. I think these kinds of
details do matter because if we're putting a story into a futuristic setting, I
think these little details of background, such as if the guy needs to make a
phone tour, how does he go about it if he needs to rent a cab? these matter
because if the story is being told in the future the whole of the background has
to be consistently futuristic I've come across a number of instances which in my
opinion are a little flawed because felt with an A.W. A writer may have seized
on a particular thought, maybe a new scientific idea or a machine or whatever.
Develops that very well, but kind of gets hung up on it and in the background,
everything else that's going on hasn't changed since 1980.
And trying to, I think, just stop typing for the five minutes it takes just to
think about a situation. The guy's going to make a phone call just like stop and
think how he might make that and think about it for five minutes and then maybe
show it in a way different to what would have been the impulsive thing to do in
the first couple of seconds. It's worth the effort. I don't think it radically
changes the story, but it does give it that finishing polish, as it were, at
least in that sense. And I try to do this in all the stories, and I find that
readers like it. I think I, from the people who write to me and the people that
I meet, one of the gratifying things I observe in the readership that I have is
that very, it is not confined to what might be termed a hardcore science fiction
reader who buys anything new that appears on the science fiction section of the
bookstores. But a lot of, I suppose, people who might be termed younger
professional people in their late 20s, 30s, 40s, in all manner of professions,
not necessarily to do with the sciences, teachers, lawyers, doctors, so forth,
who typically would say, gee, I used to read science fiction when I was at
college or when I was at university, but I kind of grew out of it. I can't
relate to way out galaxies like years away anymore or aliens running around with
ray guns today I have a family, a career a mortgage, my feet are solidly on the
surface of this planet but they seem to like stories that don't kind of try and
take them to the other side of the universe a million years from now but maybe
just stretch the future 20 or 30 years and they find names in the book like IBM
and Davis and Boeing familiar places, and it grabs them. I say, well, this I can
relate to. It's the world that I live in just stretched a little bit. The
connection is not broken. The economics and the politics have evolved from what
I read in the papers. I can still see the connections, and it could be the world
my kids grow up in. And I like it, and if it has that effect on that, you know,
far vast and a market of readership, then I'm perfectly happy to continue doing
that, in addition to the reason that I enjoy the stories better myself for doing
that. I wouldn't be misreading and saying you're an optimistic person, would I?
I think I am. I notice your stories tend to be rather optimistic. Sure. Why not?
Good question. Why not? I think there's enough doom and gloom around. I try and
contribute something to counterbalance all that. I think it's needed.
You probably would hold a great hope for the human potential then. Excuse me? I
missed a question. You probably would hold a great hope for the human potential.
Oh, I think it's unlimited. it doesn't guarantee we'll
use it correctly and wisely. There's no guarantee of that, but I have no doubt
that the potential exists and the choice is entirely up to us. And I think that
in itself is grounds for optimism. It means that we're not pawns that are pushed
around by fate or magical mystical forces that we have no control over our
future. I think that would be a very depressing thought. I think it underlies a
lot of the philosophies that we hear expounded. You know, an excuse to quit
trying, to write everything off as futile. I don't subscribe to this at all. I
think that in the same way that the individual's future lies in his or her
hands, and I think they have infinite potential to build upon if they have a, I
think the only resource that we're short of in some quarters is positive
thinking and the right attitude of mind. Nothing else. And I think collectively
the same is true. I think that there is a human tendency to be too conscious of
our failings and our faults and our mistakes, which have happened. It would be
silly to deny that. And I think, by and large, we've achieved some remarkable
and wonderful things as well and continue to do so. And I think when I look at
the bottom line of the balance sheet, I'm pretty proud to be a member of the
human race.
Okay, we're just commenting on here. I happen to agree with you. hold for just a
second here we're going to shut the machine down zero
just said go ahead and continue he just stopped and I had just stopped the
machine to find out what it was that he said that was sort of redundant on my
part okay machines cranked back up and we're
rolling again okay in your novel twice upon a time you based the story around a
device that can send messages is back in time. Yes. To itself, 24 hours in the
past. Sure. And then, by that process, just keep sending it back to itself and
back to itself. Uh-huh. I've been reading recently about several scientists who
are speculating about real possibilities of time travel. Yeah. Was your novel...
Your novel really was written before those came out. It's sort of prophetic in a
way. Maybe that's where they got it from.
Well, I don't know whether it's prophetic or not. Well, as is elaborated in the
book itself, if something like that ever became a fact, there are some pretty
interesting problems that are going to have to be solved, and our ideas of logic
and cause and effect are going to have to undergo some pretty interesting
revisions. So I'm certainly not setting myself up as a prophet and saying, yes,
it'll happen. Maybe. I don't know. I think history has shown that impossible or
it'll never happen are very dangerous phrases to use in any context. As far as I
was concerned, it was just a fun basis for a story, certainly not an original
one. Although I did, I was trying, I don't suppose any of the things I've
written about have been original in essence. I try and approach them from
hopefully fresh and different angles. But for some time, And for a number of
years, in fact, before I wrote Thrice Upon a Time, I'd been wanting to write a
Time Shavet book for a number of reasons. Firstly, I wanted to attempt to face
up to the paradoxes, the logical paradoxes, once and for all, and answer them
without cop-outs, without convenient coincidences, and without obliging
characters who just happen to do the right thing to make everything come out the
way the author said.
And secondly, I wanted to get away from this kind of cliche of some kind of a
conjurer's box described or disguised as whatever that you jump into and you
jump out of and you're in some other time. We've seen too many conjurer's boxes,
and it seemed to me unrealistic. If I ever build a box like that, and I thought
it was going to take me to another time, I certainly wouldn't jump into it and
press the button. I would conduct a long series of tests and experiments first,
and none of that heroes ever seem to do this. And it seemed to me reasonable to
say, if we're going to make the speculation of influencing the past,
it seemed to me to be reasonable to speculate that if we're going to make that
assumption anyway, that before we move structured objects and people back into
another time, we probably learn how to inject energy first. And if you can send
energy back in time, you can obviously switch the energy on and off and modulate
it and send information. In other words, you can send messages to yourself if
you like. I didn't want it to be a million years or a billion years or in some
huge span of time where really nothing that you did could make any difference.
How about a lab bench experiment? Ten minutes. You can just send a little signal
back to yourself. Ten minutes ago would change what you've already done. This is
interesting. You're hard up against the paradoxes now. You can't find a way
around them or duck them. You've got to answer the question, what happened? But
the logic of it, the whole situation becomes absolutely, it drives you to the
point of insanity trying to figure it out. I found the only way to do it was to
think in terms of the simplest possible lab bench experiment that you could
devise and strip away all the complications to just get the logic right and then
elaborate it back in up to the level that would make a story interesting. And
the simplest situation that you can think of is a button and a lamp. and when
you push the button, the lamp comes on. It couldn't get much simpler than that.
The only different thing here is the lamp comes on 10 seconds before you press
the button because the signal goes back in time. So the question is obvious.
What happens? I wait until the lamp comes on. 10 seconds later, it's time to
press the button. You're not going to press it. Nobody could make me. I didn't
want mystical forces compelling people to do something they didn't want to do.
I wanted to preserve human free will. So what happens? I don't press it up.
Conversely, I can say, well, the lamp didn't come on. But I'm going to press it
up anyway, just to hell of it. What happened? So those are two situations. One
being the inverse of the other. And if you can explain what happens, you can
answer any time travel paradox because every one is an elaboration of one of
those situations or the other. And it's not good enough to, for example, to wait
for the lamp to come on and you say, you're not going to press the button and
you fold your arms and sit there. And just as the time is up, the door opens and
somebody strolls in and says, hey, what's this? And presses the button. That
doesn't get you out of it because you're a scientist. you're going to repeat
your experiment under conditions where that couldn't happen. You'd lock the door
and set it up again. You'd go out of the room and have the computer press the
button. But eventually you would test it time and time and time again. And if
accidents happened that got you out of a mess the first time, you could
eliminate them the next time. And eventually you have to face up to that
question, what happened? That's what I wanted to do. And the third thing I
wanted to do was to tell a story in which the time machine itself and the
staggering conceptual changes in physics and philosophy that are implied are
relevant to the story that's being told they're an integral part of it if you
took them away there wouldn't be any story I think in too many stories time
machines are used like starships they're just a device a vehicle to get
characters into an unusual environment and then tell a pretty routine story that
was stolen from Greek mythology or European medieval history. And the technology
doesn't come into the story at all. They could have gone there on a greyhound
bus. I didn't want to do that. And so the story was about some physicists who
had stumbled upon this phenomenon and had realized that if what they were seeing
meant what they thought it meant, it meant that they could actually inject
information into the past, change the past, with all the questions that implies.
And they proceeded to test this phenomenon and have paid some very, very strange
results. And yet they're convinced that behind all this, there is some
consistent system of super logic that does make sense, and they're trying to
figure out the rules of it. And of course there's an unspoken or unwritten
invitation for the reader to participate. And again, I suppose it's a kind of a
detective story. Not so much a whodunit, but how is it done? To see if the
reader can figure out the rules before the characters do.
It is something that I noticed when I was reading the novel is that there are no
unresolved paradoxes in it. You do sew them all up neatly before the end of the
novel Well, that was one of the goals of writing the book. Yeah. And I think it
worked because the people who seem to know what they're talking about and have
commented seem pretty satisfied. So that made me pretty satisfied. There are a
couple of silly things in there which don't really affect the physics
of the time machine. There was a big fusion plant up in Scotland. and uh i don't
know why due to a lapse of concentration on my part in one chapter it had moved
to another part of Scotland we'll fix that when the book next reprinted it was
an eagle-eyed Scotsman wrote to me and picked that out
yeah it started off on the Solway Firth and ended up on the Murray Firth or no
the other way around i i got it on the wrong first in one chapter well maybe uh
for one of your future novels you have to explore matter transmitters. Yeah,
that's
another possibility. I did explore that in a short story I wrote called
Assassin, which was in the Stellar Anthology series, Stellar number 4.
This was exploring the possibility of matter transmission and of course people.
You can instantly get somebody from here to there, but in fact what appears
there is a copy of them, so that you've now got two of them. If the other one
decides to come back the same way, you're getting rapidly multiplying problems,
literally. Tell Assassin was a story that played around with that thought. I
must have missed that one. Since Tellur 4, it came out a couple of years ago.
Okay.
You've written a sequel to Inherit the Stars called The Gentle Giants of
Ganymede. That's right. Did you intend to follow the story in Inherit the Stars
with a sequel, or was that from reader demand or what? A bit of both. When I
wrote Inherit the Stars, I had three books in mind. I had a trilogy in mind. So
I put the hooks in. Although Inherit the Stars was a complete story in itself,
it didn't leave the reader hanging. It started and told and finished a story.
Nevertheless, there were a couple of hooks in there that invited some questions,
which sort of, as it were, paved the way to a follow-up book. And my thinking at
the time was, I'll go that far, but I won't write the second book until I have
some feedback as to how the readers liked the first one. And I got a lot of mail
and they all liked it, and a lot of them said in their letters, will there be a
follow-up, they picked out the hooks, so I wrote The Gentle Giants. And they
wanted another one, and I did have a trilogy in mind when I wrote it, and the
third one in that series is now written. It's called Giant Star, and it's a July
title, so it should start to appear in the bookstores around June. It's the
third and last. There won't be any more in that series. so it ties up a few of
the loose ends tells another story
continues with the characters we met in the previous two books both the
terrestrial and the alien characters and introduces some new ones and I don't
think there can be a short one because I don't think there is any more to be
said it wraps it all up
alright Are you working on any new projects? Yeah, I'm working on the, as I say,
Giants nossas will be out in June, July, and I'm currently working on the one
after that, which I don't have a title for yet because I always think of the
title as last. And I don't know when it'll be on sale because I don't know when
I'll finish it. Probably sometime this spring. What type of story is it without
giving away any of the plot details? How can we sum it up?
The background to the story is that we're in the second half of the next
century. And some decades previously, in other words, around the year 2020,
company a robot star probe was sent out
programmed to tour a number of stars and simply to search for habitable planets
and generally explore send down surface probes atmospheric probes things like
that radio everything back and the political situation on earth was looking very
very grave at that time I am an optimist but I can still invent World War III
scenarios for a story you know it's fiction after all the optimism may turn out
to be unjustified yet but
towards the closing years of this project In other words, obviously, you don't
build a ship like that overnight. When it was well along the way towards being
completed, it was modified to be capable of making people. Let me qualify that.
It's a strange thing to say. We read a lot of stories about starships that go on
long voyages that take maybe centuries, and inevitably they've got frozen bodies
or bodies in suspended animation or something like that. When you think about
it, it seems rather an inefficient way to say, you know, you're not doing
anything, the machines can fly the ship, the computers can get it there. The
people aren't doing anything about, except, you know, just lying there freezing,
so, you know, why not let the machines fly the ship and make the people when you
get there? if we look at the progress made in molecular biology of genetic
engineering in the last couple of decades, we already manufactured quite complex
organic molecules to specifications such as drugs and certainly anesthetics. If
we just extrapolate that a little further, who's to say you couldn't make a
complete set of human DNA? In other words, instead of sending bodies and all the
luck support equipment to freeze them and taking up all the space? Why not just
store all the genetic information necessary to make people electronically in the
computers and create them when you have found a planet that the instruments say
they could survive on. And, you know, let's imagine for the sake of argument
that 10 light years away you found a planet. Well, if the robots should have got
there and sent back a signal saying started the experiment. Well, 10 years
later, the signal gets to Earth. And even if they responded instantly, the
ship's been in orbit for 20 years doing nothing, just waiting for a reply. Well,
the ultimate test of whether or not a planet is inhabitable is to set up a
colony and try it. And so we could have used those 20 years. So here's the
interesting possibility of a race that evolves from a first generation of
embryos that were created and nurtured and raised by computers and robots, a
machine-raised race. And when you think about it, the relationship between the
children and the machines does not really have to be a cold and sinister one at
all. It could be quite a charming and amusing one. and the interesting thoughts
that the book starts to play with is here's a race of kids that are being raised
by
some very rational, direct down to earth entities who don't double talk or
deceive or have all these layers of human game playing that we have to contend
with and they're not being raised completely
without any exposure to the conditioning of conditioned adults with their
prejudices and hatreds and taboos and a lot of the other nonsenses that make
life so complicated in our society. And also, I mean, they're not a primitive
society. They're a very high-technology society. They arrive with some of the
most advanced equipment and technology ever devised
while they were in orbit and growing up through infancy the machines were down
on the surface preparing surface bases manufacturing facilities and industries
and so forth by the time they actually enter adolescence the races the
generations I should say that follow thereafter all of their material needs are
provided by by highly automated means that in terms of their productivity
relative to their numbers, everyone is a millionaire. And let's imagine that a
mission from Earth eventually shows up,
virtually... a big mission, a twenty year voyage maybe, so we're talking about a
space ship that that maybe houses 20,000 people, virtually a space colony with
engines, with its government, its military, its church organizations, its
commercial institutions, the whole of society in miniature with its time-proved
mechanisms for controlling and subordinating a population, which traditionally a
ruling elite through history has imposed itself by restricting the flow of
wealth and by offering protection either from real or imagined threats? So how
do you control a race of millionaires who don't need your wealth? And the idea
of restricting anything has never occurred to them, of restricting the supply of
anything. They don't need you to protect them from anybody. And none of the
tricks or the psychology or the scare tactics work. So, what happens when a race
of machine-raised people eventually collides with a race of people-raised
people? And that's really what the story is all about. Alright, let's hold for
just a second. Crank the machine back up here. Okay.
Shut the machine back up. Okay, I'll go ahead and ask the question and then
we'll just splice this into this show when we do it. Okay. In your novel Two
Faces of Tomorrow you explore the future of machine intelligence How far away do
you think we might be from intelligent computers?
I don't know that I have an answer to that Two Faces
was not intended to be prophetic in any way nothing that I write in the
fictional sense is I simply sketch possibilities of what might be, not
predictions of what will be. Putting a time limit on, it's an awkward thing to
be asked to do. While I'm sort of thinking about this, my mind is going back
over the number of confident predictions that have been made in the past on
various topics that prove disastrously wrong either one way or the other?
I see no reason in principle why artificial
systems of some kind not necessarily what we'd call computers in other words
electronics of some form inside a box of some form that simply man-made system
should not in principle be capable of
all of the feats that are performed by the human mind in other words thinking in
the sense that we normally use the word and all its connotations in everyday
conversation
we have a system already in existence a physical system that can think, the
human brain itself we could turn the question around a little and say if the
human brain is a physical system that can think is there any reason to suppose
that some other system shouldn't be capable of doing likewise? And I see my
answer is absolutely no reason why not. All right. I don't see anything unique
that sets the human brain. I think the question really, it becomes metaphysical.
I think the question, what's lurking behind or beneath the surface of this whole
debate is do we feel that the human mind can be adequately accounted for by the
familiar laws of physics and no more? Or does the phenomenon of mind require
something extra, some life force, some mystical agency, a soul, call it what you
like? And depending how we answer that question, I think that will shape our
answer to the artificial intelligence issue. Personally, I feel that the human
mind requires nothing extra to account for it. That being so, there's no reason
why an equally complex system that happened to have come from some other origin
than natural evolution. For example, in other words, having been conceived and
built by human beings shouldn't be capable of the same...